Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
This video, unlike the last one, is not going
to be practical, meaning that you won’t
actually go on and configure a Cisco router
or switch.
Also, most of the information in this video
won’t be new, we’ve already covered most
of it in previous videos.
However, I decided to make this video because
I think it’s very important to make sure
you have a good understanding of the complete
process a packet goes through when being sent
across networks.
Hopefully this video will be a little shorter
than the usual ones.
Let’s get started.
So, what will we cover in this video?
We’ll cover the entire process of sending
a packet to a remote destination.
This will include things like ARP, encapsulation,
de-encapsulation, etc.
Of course, there are different levels of depth
we can go into when talking about this process,
and I won’t give unnecessary details that
would only be expected of a CCNP or CCIE,
but in this video I hope to give you a solid
understanding to get you ready for your CCNA.
My hope is that this video will help you put
all of the pieces together that we learned
previously.
So, this is the life of a packet, the process
a packet goes through when being sent to remote
networks.
Here’s the network topology we’ll use
for this video.
If you watched day 11’s video, you should
recognize this topology, as it’s the same
one we used to demonstrate static routing.
We’ll follow a packet being sent from PC1
in the 192.168.1.0/24 network, to PC4 in the
192.168.4.0/24 network.
Let’s assume we have pre-configured static
routes on these devices, so that the packet
will follow the same path as in the static
routing video, that is from PC1 to R1, R2,
R4, and then PC4.
This doesn’t have to be the path the packet
takes, the path that goes via R3 instead of
R2 is valid too, but we’ll stick to the
same path as last time.
Now, since we’re not just looking at Layer
3 in this video, let me add MAC addresses
for these devices.
I’ll use 1111 for PC1.
Now, as you know a MAC address is actually
12 hexadecimal characters, but just to save
space I’ll shorten them to 4.
R1’s G0/2 interface has a mac address of
AAAA, and it’s G0/0 interface has a MAC
address of BBBB.
That’s something I didn’t mention before,
each interface on a network device has a unique
MAC address.
Note that SW1’s interfaces also have MAC
addresses, however for this video it’s not
necessary to know the MAC addresses of the
switches so to avoid clutter, I’ll leave
them out of this diagram.
R2 has a MAC address of CCCC on its g0/0 interface,
and DDDD on its G0/1 interface.
R4 has a MAC address of EEEE on its G0/1 interface
and FFFE on its G0/2 interface.
I didn’t make it all Fs, because the MAC
address of FFFF.FFFF.FFFF, 12 Fs, is the broadcast
MAC address, so just to avoid confusion I
added that E on the end.
Finally, PC4 has a MAC address of 4444.
Okay, so PC1 wants to send some data to PC4,
and its encapsulated in this IP header.
The source is 192.168.1.1, PC1’s IP address,
and the destination is 192.168.4.1, PC4’s
IP address.
Now, because PC1’s IP address is in the
192.168.1.0/24 network, it notices that the
address 192.168.4.1 is in a different network,
so it knows that it needs to send the packet
to its default gateway, which is R1, something
we have already preconfigured.
However, in this example PC1 has not sent
any traffic yet, so it needs to use ARP, the
address resolution protocol, something we
covered in a previous video.
Let’s look at the ARP process once more.
So PC1 makes this ARP request packet.
The source IP is its own IP address and then
destination is R1’s G0/2 interface, which
is the default gateway configured on PC1.
Next is the MAC addresses.
This is a minor point, but note that I put
the source IP before the destination IP, but
the destination MAC before the source MAC.
That’s because, in the IPv4 header the source
IP address comes first, but in the ethernet
header the destination MAC address comes first.
Anyway, just a minor point.
The destination MAC address is the broadcast
MAC address of all Fs, because it
doesn’t know the MAC address of R1, so it
will send the frame to all hosts on the network.
Finally the source MAC address is its own MAC address.
So, it sends the frame, which SW1 receives
and broadcasts out of all its interfaces
except the one it received the frame on.
In this example, only PC1 and R1 are connected
to SW1, so that means that SW1 will forward
the frame out of it’s G0/0 interface.
To translate the meaning of this frame into
English, PC1 is saying ‘Hi 192.168.1.254.
What’s your MAC address?’.
Although I’m not going to really talk about
the switches much in this video, note that
SW1 learns PC1’s MAC address on its G0/1
interface when the frame arrives on its G0/1
interface.
When this broadcast frame arrives on R1, it
notices that the destination IP is its own
IP, so it creates this ARP reply frame to
send back to PC1.
Although the ARP request message was broadcast,
because R1 learned PC1’s IP and MAC addresses
from the ARP request message, the ARP reply
can be sent unicast directly to PC1.
So, that’s what R1 does.
To translate this ARP reply message into english,
basically it means Hi 192.168.1.1 This is 192.168.1.254.
My MAC address is aaaa.
Note that SW1 will learn R1’s MAC address
from this message, when the frame arrives
on its G0/0 interface.
So, now PC1 knows the MAC address of its default
gateway, so it encapsulates the packet with
this ethernet header.
Keep in mind, the original packet is not changed,
the destination address remains PC4’s IP
address, NOT R1’s IP address.
Only at Layer 2 is the destination set to
R1’s MAC address.
So, it sends the frame to R1.
R1 receives it, and removes the ethernet header.
It looks up the destination in its routing
table.
The most specific match is this entry for
the 192.168.4.0/24 network, which specifies
a next hop of 192.168.12.2.
So, R1 will have to encapsulate this packet
with an Ethernet frame with the appropriate
MAC address for 192.168.12.2.
However, R1 doesn’t know R2’s MAC address
yet.  So,
how will it learn R2’s MAC address?
It will use ARP, of course.
The source IP address of this ARP request
will be R1’s, and the destination will be
R2’s.
The destination MAC address is  all Fs,
the broadcast MAC address, because R1 doesn’t
know R2’s MAC address, and the source is
bbbb, which is the MAC address of R1’s G0/0
interface.
So, it sends the arp request, and R2 receives
it.
Basically, what this ARP request says is Hi
192.168.12.2, what’s your MAC address?
R2 receives the broadcast, and since the destination
IP address matches its own IP address, it
makes this ARP reply to send to R1.
Once again, because it learned the IP and
MAC addresses of R1 from the ARP request,
it doesn’t have to broadcast the frame.
So, it sends this ARP reply back, which basically
says hi 192.168.12.1, this is 192.168.12.2.
My MAC address is cccc.
Okay, now R1 knows R2’s MAC address, so
it can encapsulate the packet with an Ethernet
header, inserting R2’s MAC address in the
destination field, and the MAC address of
R1’s G0/0 interface in the source field,
and it sends it to R2.
After receiving the frame, R2 removes the
Ethernet header.
R2 then looks up the destination IP address
in its routing table, and the most specific
match is this one for 192.168.4.0/24, with
a next hop of 192.168.24.4.
Although 192.168.24.0/24 is a connected network
to R2, it doesn’t know the MAC address of
R4.
So, you know what’s next.
R2 will use ARP to discover R4’s MAC address.
R2 prepares this ARP request frame, using
its own IP and MAC addresses for the source,
R4’s IP address as the destination, and
the broadcast MAC address, and it forwards
it out of its G0/1 interface.
With this ARP request, R2 is saying ‘Hi
192.168.24.4.
What’s your MAC address?’
R4 receives the broadcast, and since the destination
IP address is its own it creates this ARP
reply frame to send back to R2, once again
it already knows R2’s IP and MAC addresses
because they were used as the source addresses
for the ARP request.
It sends the unicast frame back to R2.
With this ARP reply, R4 is saying ‘Hi 192.168.24.2.
This is 192.168.24.4.
My MAC address is eeee.’
Now that R2 knows R4’s MAC address, it encapsulates
PC1’s packet with an Ethernet header, with
a destination MAC address of eeee, which is
R4’s g0/1 interface, and a source MAC address
of dddd, which is R2’s g0/1 interface.
R4 receives the frame and removes the Ethernet
header.
It looks up 192.168.4.1 in its routing table,
and the most specific match is this entry
for 192.168.4.0/24, which is directly connected
via the G0/2 interface.
But, once again R4 doesn’t know PC4’s
MAC address yet, so you know what it has to
do next.
It will use ARP to learn PC4’s MAC address.
It prepares this ARP request frame, again
the source IP and MAC addresses are its own,
the destination IP address is PC4’s, and
the destination MAC is the broadcast MAC address
of all F’s.
It sends this message out of its G0/2 interface,
saying Hi 192.168.4.1, what’s your MAC address?
Note that SW4 will learn R4’s MAC address
on its g0/0 interface from the source MAC
address field of this ethernet frame.
After PC4 receives the frame, it checks the
destination IP address.
Since it is its own IP address, it will send
an ARP reply.
The ARP reply will be unicast, using PC4’s
IP and MAC addresses for the source and R4’s
IP and MAC addresses for the destination.
It sends the frame out of its network interface,
saying ‘Hi 192.168.4.254.
This is 192.168.4.1.
My MAC address is 4444.’
Note that SW4 learns PC4’s MAC address when
it arrives on its G0/1 interface.
Now that R4 knows PC4’s MAC address, it
adds an ethernet header to the packet, using
its own MAC address on the G0/2 interface
as the source address, and PC4’s MAC address
as the destination.
R4 sends the frame to PC4, and finally it
has reached its destination.
Notice that the original packet hasn’t changed
throughout the process.
It’s always used the same IP header with
a source IP address of 192.168.1.1 and a destination
IP address of 192.168.4.1.
Also notice that the switches didn’t actually
modify the frames at any point.
The switches forwarded the frames and learned
the MAC addresses, but they don’t actually
de-encapsulate and then re-encapsulate the
packet with a new ethernet header.
Okay, now let’s say PC4 sends a reply back
to PC1, and we’ve configured static routes
on the routers so that the traffic follows
the same path on the way back to PC1, going
via SW4, R4, R2, R1, SW1, and then reaching
PC1.
What will be different?
First off, there will be one major difference.
Since these devices have already gone through
the ARP process, there won’t be any need
for ARP requests and replies, the packet will
simply be forwarded from device to device,
being de-encapsulated and then re-enapsulated
as it is received by and then forwarded by
each router.
So, that’s it, just a basic walkthrough
of how a packet is forwarded between routers
to pass it along to its final destination.
Now, as for today’s quiz, I’ll do something
different than usual.
Instead of having multiple choice questions
as usual, we’ll use this same diagram to
test your understanding.
Let’s get started with the quiz.
Here’s question 1.
PC4 sends a packet to PC1.
What is the destination MAC address when it
is sent from PC4’s network interface?
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is FFFE, which is the MAC address
of R4’s G0/2 interface.
That’s because, to send the packet to PC1,
which is in a remote network, PC4 must send
the packet to its default gateway, R4, first.
To do that, it encapsulates the packet with
an ethernet header, with its default gateway’s
MAC address as the destination.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
PC4 sends a packet to PC1.
What is the source MAC address when it is
received on R1’s Gi0/0 interface?
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is CCCC, which is the MAC address
of R2’s G0/0 interface.
When R2 sends the packet to R1 en route to
its destination, PC1, it encapsulates the
packet with an Ethernet header using its own
MAC address as the source MAC address.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
PC4 sends a packet to PC1.
What is the source MAC address when it is
sent from SW1’s Gi0/1 interface?
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is AAAA, which is the MAC address
of R1’s G0/2 interface.
SW1 doesn’t alter the frame to use its own
MAC address, it simply forwards the frame
out of the correct interface, or floods it
if it doesn’t know the destination.
Let’s go to question 4.
PC4 sends a packet to PC1.
What is the destination IP address when it
is sent from R4’s Gi0/1 interface?
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is 192.168.1.1, which is the IP
address of PC1.
Although each router modifies the source and
destination MAC addresses in the Ethernet
header as it forwards the packet, they don’t
modify the original packet itself, so the
destination IP address won’t change.
Since PC4 is sending the packet to PC1, that
means the destination will be PC1’s IP address,
192.168.1.1.
Let’s go to question 5.
PC4 sends a packet to PC1.
What is the source IP address when it is received
on R1’s Gi0/0 interface?
Pause the video to think about your answer.
The answer is 192.168.4.1, which is the IP
address of PC4.
As I said in the last question, the original
packet is not modified as the routers forward
it to its destination, so through the whole
route the source IP address remains PC4’s
IP address, 192.168.4.1.
Okay, for this video there will once again
be supplementary materials to help you practice
what you’ve learned.
There will be a packet tracer lab in which
you use packet tracer’s ‘simulation’
mode to analyze a packet and test your knowledge
and understanding.  That will be the next video.
And that’s it, there won’t be a flashcard
deck this video since there wasn’t actually
any new information in this video.
However, if there are some new points that
you picked up in this video, feel free to
make your own flashcards.
Actually, even though I make flashcard decks
for each video, I also think its a good idea
to make your own flashcards too, if there
is anything else you want to remember.
You can also edit the flashcards I provide,
or delete some flashcards if you think some
of them are not necessary.
The flashcards are just a tool to help you,
so feel free to use them however you think
is best.
Okay, that’s all for today’s video.
Good luck with your studies.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.